Add blog post on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation SIG (#5956)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2025/go-compile-time-instrumentation.md

---
title: Alibaba and Datadog Join Forces on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation
linkTitle: Go Compile-Time Instrumentation
date: 2025-01-17

> author: OpenTelemetry Governance Committee

Author: Thanks. I'll add https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2509 to it, as I'm assuming it needs to be a single issue (otherwise I could do both donation proposal issues).

  to hooks in your application (see
  [opentelemetry-go-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-instrumentation/)).
- Manually configure instrumentation libraries in your code (see an
  [example](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/go/getting-started/#instrument-the-http-server)
  to instrument `net/http`).

For different reasons, it is possible that none of those options is viable, or
optimal, in your environment. However, things are about to change!

## Industry collaboration at the heart of open standards

Over the past few months, OpenTelemetry has received not one, but two donation
proposals from industry leaders to provide a solution to the problem described
above, and enable the use of zero-code, vendor-neutral, compile-time
instrumentation in Go applications. These are:

- Alibaba's
  [opentelemetry-go-auto-instrumentation](https://github.com/alibaba/opentelemetry-go-auto-instrumentation)
  (see
  [donation proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2344)).
- Datadog's [Orchestrion](https://github.com/datadog/orchestrion) (see
  [donation proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2497)).

> 

Reviewer: Adding one-line introduction to compile-time instrumentation would be great. Otherwise looks good. Thank you for doing this.

Author: I don't know how I missed that, but absolutely. Will change it.

Author: Added below.

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe, it would make sense that the project will replace first attempt of compile-time go instrumentation (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/tree/main/instrgen)

Author: Yes, I thought of doing that and then forgot to include it... will add it.

Author: I've added this below

>The initial output from this SIG will soon replace
[instrgen](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/dafdad14b7858c7f491c8cb72e4bc7deaf9378e3/instrgen/README.md),
Go SIG's initial experimental approach to provide compile-time instrumentation.
In the longer term, this SIG will focus on

We are really grateful to Alibaba and Datadog for these donation proposals. This
continues to demonstrate the convergence of the wider industry towards the
standards defined by OpenTelemetry.

The most exciting part of this announcement is that it won't be Alibaba's or
Datadog's solution that "wins". In the true spirit of open source collaboration,
these two organisations have decided to join forces and commit the necessary
resources to bootstrap a new
[Go Compile-Time Instrumentation SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/projects/go-compile-instrumentation.md),
with the intention of providing a unified, vendor-neutral approach that picks
the best aspects of each solution and benefits the community as a whole.

This SIG will focus on:

- Developing compiler plugins or enhancements that inject instrumentation code
  automatically, ensuring minimal runtime performance overhead and compatibility
  with existing Go projects.
- Providing standardized instrumentation patterns aligned with OpenTelemetry and

>   other monitoring frameworks.

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to add the SIG information in case any one who want to contribute?

SIG Overview:
- GitHub repository: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
- Zoom meeting: [Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0/embed?src=c_2bf73e3b6b530da4babd444e72b76a6ad893a5c3f43cf40467abc7a9a897f977@group.calendar.google.com)
- Slack: #otel-go-compt-instr-sig
- Biweekly Meetings: UTC: 08:00 – 09:00 Every Thursday

Author: Very good point. Will update it.

Author: Done

We are really grateful to Alibaba and Datadog for these donation proposals. This
continues to demonstrate the convergence of the wider industry towards the
standards defined by OpenTelemetry.

Compile-time instrumentation leverages the standard Go toolchain’s `-toolexec`
mechanism to re-write Go source code before it is passed to the Go compiler,
adding instrumentation in all relevant places (including dependencies as well as
the Go standard library).

The most exciting part of this announcement is that it won't be Alibaba's or
Datadog's solution that "wins". In the true spirit of open source collaboration,
these two organisations have decided to join forces and commit the necessary
resources to bootstrap a new
[Go Compile-Time Instrumentation SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/projects/go-compile-instrumentation.md),
with the intention of providing a unified, vendor-neutral approach that picks
the best aspects of each solution and benefits the community as a whole.

The initial output from this SIG will soon replace
[instrgen](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/dafdad14b7858c7f491c8cb72e4bc7deaf9378e3/instrgen/README.md),

> Go SIG's initial experimental approach to provide compile-time instrumentation.

Reviewer 2: It probably does not matter, but to be precise, instrgen was owned and developed by https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-instrumentation (which is ebf) and is also based on `toolexec` (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/pull/4058/files)

Author: Thanks. I will remove the specific mention of the Go SIG and clarify that this was also utilising `toolexec`

> In the longer term, this SIG will focus on:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

In the longer term, this SIG will focus on:
```

---
title: Alibaba and Datadog Join Forces on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation
linkTitle: Go Compile-Time Instrumentation

> date: 2025-01-17

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
date: 2025-01-20
```

Let's keep this open until a final date is set

---

> title: Alibaba and Datadog Join Forces on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Alibaba, Datadog and Quesma Join Forces on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation
```

Author: Makes sense @pdelewski. Was `instrgen` an original donation/work delivered mainly by Quesma? I can mention that in the body if that's the case.

Reviewer 2: `instrgen` was a one-man project that I delivered during my tenure at Sumo Logic. I submitted original donation request.

Reviewer 5: I'm grateful to have Quesma as part of the SIG, but I think the strong statement we want to make as part of this blog post is that the two recent donation proposals we had in this area are joining forces with a strong commitment behind the SIG. If we have a public statement from Quesma stating that they are committed to the SIG as well beyond the interests of individual engineers, we can definitely consider adding them alongside Alibaba and Datadog.

Reviewer 6: Hey Juraci,

as a co-founder and CEO of Quesma, we support SIG, and part of giving back to the open-source community is this effort. Our product is written in Go lang and would benefit from such a project. Though, we are not an observability vendor, but an early startup with limited resources. 

We previously worked together in Sumo Logic and during both times, this was a side passion project of one talented individual.

Author: That sounds excellent, we just want to make sure the support is coming from Quesma and not from one talented individual who is currently working at Quesma. This ensures that the SIG is healthy in the long-term even if that individual were to change affiliation and perhaps not able to contribute any longer. From what's mentioned above I take it that's the case?

Reviewer 6: Yes, that's the case. Quesma is a CNCF Silver member which shows our long-term commitment that is beyond one individual. 
[![CNCF Landscape](https://img.shields.io/badge/CNCF%20Landscape-5699C6)](https://landscape.cncf.io/?item=cncf-members--silver--quesma-member)

Author: Great. Let's add it then. I will add something to the body of the doc to reflect this too (just so that it gives more context than the title).

> The most exciting part of this announcement is that it won't be Alibaba's or Datadog's solution that "wins". In the true spirit of open source collaboration, these two organisations have decided to join forces and commit the necessary resources to bootstrap a new [Go Compile-Time Instrumentation SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/projects/go-compile-instrumentation.md), with the intention of providing a unified, vendor-neutral approach that picks the best aspects of each solution and benefits the community as a whole. They will be supported with further contributions from Quesma, bringing in experience on [instrgen](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/dafdad14b7858c7f491c8cb72e4bc7deaf9378e3/instrgen/README.md), OpenTelemetry's initial experimental approach to provide Go compile-time instrumentation based on -toolexec and which will be superseded as part of the initial efforts of this SIG.

---

> title:
>   Alibaba, Datadog and Quesma Join Forces on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation

Reviewer 7: How about:

```suggestion
title: 'Go Compile-Time Instrumentation: Alibaba, Datadog, and Quesma Join Forces'
```

Reviewer 7: Also, regardless of what you choose, the "t" in "Time" should be lowercase given that it's a single word (even if compound).

Reviewer 7: As an open source org, we should be emphasizing the technology. Gratitude to sponsors and contributors is well being shown by the article itself (and the fact that they are mentioned in the title ... which could be even open to debate).

@open-telemetry/docs-approvers WDYT?

As for capitalization: Ok, Chicago style works for me (we don't have a strict policy / guideline here -- I'd prefer sentence case for titles, as I've seen other tech docs teams adopt, but that's a discussion for another time).

Author: Open for discussion, however the intention of this blog post is to highlight the donations, and collaboration, as they're a significant step towards industry alignment. Similar story with https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/elastic-contributes-continuous-profiling-agent/

Reviewer 7: Got it. Ok. If we're keeping the title as is, add a(n Oxford) comma after "Datadog".

linkTitle: Go Compile-Time Instrumentation
date: 2025-01-17
author: OpenTelemetry Governance Committee
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2509
sig: Governance Committee
cSpell:ignore: instrgen quesma toolexec
---

Standards are only useful if they're widely adopted, and adoption is only
effective if the available tooling facilitates it. I imagine
[SI units](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_System_of_Units) would
not have been too popular when they were introduced if you had to build your own
scales to weigh things in Kilograms!

If you use [OpenTelemetry in Go](/docs/languages/go/), you'll be familiar with
the challenges of configuring instrumentation libraries to automatically
generate telemetry from well-known open source components. Due to the compiled
nature of the language, you currently have two options (unless you want to

> "build your own scales", or the OTel equivalent):

Reviewer 7: Could you put the parenthetical remark in a footnote instead?

Author: Good idea.

Author: Done

> - Use a separate binary that analyzes your Go process and attaches eBPF programs
>   to hooks in your application (see
>   [opentelemetry-go-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-instrumentation/)).
> - Manually configure instrumentation libraries in your code (see an
>   [example](/docs/languages/go/getting-started/#instrument-the-http-server) to
>   instrument `net/http`).

Reviewer 7: I'd vote for a comma or m-dashe instead of parenthetical remarks. E.g.,

```suggestion
- Use a separate binary that analyzes your Go process and attaches eBPF programs
  to hooks in your application &mdash; see
  [opentelemetry-go-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-instrumentation/).
- Manually configure instrumentation libraries in your code, for example see
  [Instrument the HTTP server](/docs/languages/go/getting-started/#instrument-the-http-server).
```

For different reasons, it is possible that none of those options is viable, or
optimal, in your environment. However, things are about to change!

## Industry collaboration at the heart of open standards

Over the past few months, OpenTelemetry has received not one, but two donation
proposals from industry leaders to provide a solution to the problem described
above, and enable the use of zero-code, vendor-neutral, compile-time
instrumentation in Go applications. These are:

> - Alibaba's
>   [opentelemetry-go-auto-instrumentation](https://github.com/alibaba/opentelemetry-go-auto-instrumentation)
>   (see
>   [donation proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2344)).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Alibaba's [donation proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2344) of 
  [opentelemetry-go-auto-instrumentation](https://github.com/alibaba/opentelemetry-go-auto-instrumentation)
```

> - Datadog's [Orchestrion](https://github.com/datadog/orchestrion) (see
>   [donation proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2497)).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Datadog's [donation proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2497) of [Orchestrion](https://github.com/datadog/orchestrion)
```

> We are really grateful to Alibaba and Datadog for these donation proposals. This

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
We are very grateful to Alibaba and Datadog for these donation proposals. This
```

---
title:

>   Alibaba, Datadog and Quesma Join Forces on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  Alibaba, Datadog, and Quesma Join Forces on Go Compile-Time Instrumentation
```

linkTitle: Go Compile-Time Instrumentation

> date: 2025-01-17

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2025-01-21
```

> date: 2025-01-17

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2025-01-24
```
